---
date: '2010-11-13T10:24:00.000-08:00'
description: ''
published: true
slug: 2010-11-13-becoming-academic-road-warrior
tags:
- http://schemas.google.com/blogger/2008/kind#post
- legacy-blogger
time_to_read: 5
title: Becoming an academic road warrior
---

*This was originally posted on blogger [here](http://www.russpoldrack.org/2010/11/becoming-academic-road-warrior.html)*.

<!--StartFragment-->  <br /><div class="MsoNormal">It’s a reality that if you want to make it in academic science, you have to be ready and willing to travel a good bit.<span>&nbsp; </span>Between conferences, talks at other universities, grant review panels, and other various events in the US and abroad, I generally end up flying between 50,000 and 100,000 miles a year.<span>&nbsp; </span>Students and postdocs often ask me how I can stand to travel so much, and this post will lay out some of the strategies that I use keep myself sane while on the road.<span>&nbsp; </span>I should note up front that many of these strategies are not exactly “budget travel” ; my feeling is that I travel enough that it’s worth investing in some things that make it pleasant, but I realize that this may conflict with the realities of student or postdoc salaries.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal"><b>Pick an airline and stick with it</b></div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">I think that airline loyalty is probably the most important thing one can do to make traveling more pleasant.<span>&nbsp; </span>Most airlines have loyalty programs for people who travel at least 25,000 miles (that’s about 5 rounds trips from LA to DC, for example), and achieving this level of frequent flyer “status” comes with some very nice benefits.<span>&nbsp; </span>Foremost is access to priority check-in and priority security lines.<span>&nbsp; </span>The benefit of priority security varies between airports, but in many places (like the United terminals at LAX or O’Hare) it can save a very long wait to get through security during busy times.<span>&nbsp; </span>As your status increases, so do the benefits; in particular, once you reach “gold” status (50,000 miles on most airlines) then you become much more likely to get upgraded to first class, which is always a nice perk.<span>&nbsp; </span>Some airlines (like United) give preferred seating (with extra legroom) to frequent flyers, which makes using your laptop much more bearable.<span>&nbsp; </span>Another benefit is that you have priority for rebooking when problems occur.<span>&nbsp; </span>Finally, another benefit of loyalty is that it gives you a chance to learn the airline’s terminals and systems, which can be really useful when you are running late or things go wrong.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">I was a frequent flyer with United for many years, but recently switched to Continental after moving to Austin – I’ve been quite happy with both overall, and fortunately with their merger these are becoming one airline.<span>&nbsp; </span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><span><br /></span></div><div class="MsoNormal">When another institution invites you to come and give a talk, it’s perfectly legitimate to tell them what airline you want to fly on (and even what flights you want to take), and give them your frequent flyer number.<span>&nbsp; </span>This has the nice side benefit that your itinerary will show up on the airline’s online system, so you can see schedule changes and check in online.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">Be sure to sign up for text alerts from your airline, which will let you know about delays or upgrades.<span>&nbsp; </span>Also, when problems arise, it’s often better to call the airline directly rather than waiting in line to speak to a customer service representative when the lines are long.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal"><b>Join the club</b></div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">If you’ve spent any time in airports you have probably wondered what goes on inside the “Red Carpet Club” or other airline lounges.<span>&nbsp; </span>The short story is that it’s a place where you can pay to get away from the craziness of the terminal, and if you are going to fly regularly it is money well spent.<span>&nbsp; </span>It’s not cheap (generally about $400/year) but if you are flying 20 round trips in a year then that’s just $10 for each one-way trip – well worth the price IMHO.<span>&nbsp; </span>Perks include free wi-fi, snacks, and drinks (usually just beer) – unless you are in a European airport, where it generally includes a full spread of food and a full bar (though not always free wi-fi).<span>&nbsp;&nbsp; </span>But perhaps the most important benefit of the club is that there are customer service representatives that can help with flight problems – this is especially useful when large disruptions occur due to weather, resulting in long lines at the customer service desks out in the terminal.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><span>&nbsp; </span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><b>Keep calm and carry on</b></div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">NEVER check a bag unless you absolutely have to. It is certainly possible to travel for weeks with just a carry-on bag, if you pack carefully and take advantage of hotel laundry services while on the road.</div><div class="MsoNormal">I have two bags that I use for most of my trips.<span>&nbsp; </span>My primary bag for trips longer than 2 days is a<a href="http://www.briggs-riley.com/category/productDetail.aspx?id=21-inch-One-touch-Carry-On-Expandable-Upright_U421LX"> 21” expanadable carry on</a>.<span>&nbsp; </span>I find that I can generally make it up to 4-5 days with this bag in its carry-on (un-expanded) configuration, depending on the season and what kinds of clothing I have to carry. </div><div class="MsoNormal">For 1-2 day trips I use a small <a href="http://www.briggs-riley.com/category/productDetail.aspx?id=Wheeled-Carry-all_U214">carry-all</a>.<span>&nbsp; </span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><span><br /></span></div><div class="MsoNormal">Learning to pack can help you really maximize your carry-on space - for example, see (<a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/06/business/06PACK.html?_r=1">Packing Tips from Professional Travelers</a>) - I particularly find that rolling my clothes helps to maximize packing density.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">Once you can afford it, buy some good luggage.<span>&nbsp; </span>I use Briggs &amp; Riley, which is not cheap but has a lifetime warranty and has very good usability in general.<span>&nbsp; </span>Nothing sucks more than luggage failure in the middle of a trip.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">I also carry a <a href="http://www.timbuk2.com/tb2/products/commute-2.0">TSA-approved laptop bag</a>; having to remove your laptop is a pretty small thing, but every little bit counts when it comes to getting through security without stress.</div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal"><b>Stay prepared</b></div><div class="MsoNormal"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal">I don’t want to have to scramble the morning of my flight to find all of the toiletries that you need to take with me, so I have a separate set of toiletries that I keep ready just for travel.<span>&nbsp; </span>I use either <a href="http://www.rei.com/product/402056">2 ounce Nalgene bottles</a> or <a href="http://www.wikihow.com/Reuse-Empty-Pill-Bottles">recycled pill bottles</a> to hold most of my toiletries, so that I can fit everything into the TSA-approved quart bag.<span>&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><span><br /></span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><b>Some things I always bring:</b></div><div class="MsoNormal"></div><ul><li>extra ziploc bags</li><li>earplugs (for the plane and/or the hotel)</li><li>noise-cancelling headphones (I use the <a href="http://www.sennheiserusa.com/noise-cancelling-headphones-travel-headphones_502818">Sennheiser travel headphones</a> which are are small and light)</li><li>an energy bar (in case I miss the chance to eat between long flights)</li><li>my yoga mat (to keep me flexible after too much sitting - I have a very thin and light mat that's easy to pack)</li><li>for international travel: <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zolpidem">Ambien</a> (for sleeping on the plane and overcoming jet lag)</li></ul><br /><div class="MsoNormal"><span><br /></span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><span><br /></span></div><div class="MsoNormal"><span><br /></span></div><!--EndFragment-->

---

## 1 comments captured from [original post](http://www.russpoldrack.org/2010/11/becoming-academic-road-warrior.html) on Blogger

**Stephan said on 2010-11-14**

Russ, This is awesome advice!

