---
date: '2012-02-09T05:37:00.000-08:00'
description: ''
published: true
slug: 2012-02-09-quitting-cable
tags:
- http://schemas.google.com/blogger/2008/kind#post
- legacy-blogger
time_to_read: 5
title: Quitting cable
---

*This was originally posted on blogger [here](http://www.russpoldrack.org/2012/02/quitting-cable.html)*.

I was inspired by <a href="http://flowingdata.com/2012/02/09/why-i-want-to-quit-cable/">Nathan's post at Flowing Data</a>&nbsp;to say a bit about how our experiment with giving up cable TV is going. Back in September, we turned off our U-Verse subscription, sent back the DVR, and started getting our TV solely from the computer (we use a Mac Mini as our media center PC). &nbsp;Here is our experience so far:<br /><br /><b>We watch a lot less TV</b>. &nbsp;Our TV routine has now morphed from watching 2-3 hours per night into watching a single show every night (recent favorites are The Layover and Top Chef, with Colbert Report as our fallback). &nbsp;In its place we are reading a lot more; in fact, much of the money that we are saving on cable is probably flowing to the Kindle store at Amazon. &nbsp;However, we have also recently started using the <a href="http://austinlibrary.lib.overdrive.com/D31549D5-8B4D-47C2-8D5C-F1534C1E0CCF/10/845/en/Default.htm">Austin Public Library's ebook lending service</a> which is a great way to save on ebooks. &nbsp;I've also been playing the guitar more often.<br /><br /><b>Sometimes you really want live TV</b>. &nbsp;The one problem with getting everything from the web is that it's often hard to find a good live stream; we had this problem on new year's eve. &nbsp;To solve this, I recently installed a solution to allow us to view live broadcast TV from the computer, using an<br /><a href="http://www.elgato.com/elgato/na/mainmenu/products/EyeTV-One/product1.en.html">Elgato EyeTV One Computer TV Tuner&nbsp;</a>with a <a href="http://www.gomohu.com/the-leaf-indoor-hdtv-antenna/">Mohu Leaf HDTV antenna</a>. &nbsp;With this slick combination we are able to get 13 channels of over-the-air HDTV for free. &nbsp;The EyeTV software is really nice; it has good DVR functionality and an integrated TV Guide. &nbsp;It's very much like having cable with 13 channels, except that the DVR functions are much better than any set-top DVR we ever had.<br /><br /><b>Hulu Plus &nbsp;&gt; Netflix</b>. &nbsp;We have found that Hulu Plus meets our TV viewing needs quite well. &nbsp;Sure we have to watch some commercials, but we are usually able to get new shows the next day after they air, and the selection is pretty good. &nbsp;I tried a free trial of Netflix online, but we have not found that it has much to offer us, except for an occasional movie. &nbsp;However, we watch movies pretty rarely, and so it probably makes more sense for us to just buy them from iTunes. &nbsp;For shows that are not available on the web or via Hulu (e.g., The Layover), we buy them from iTunes as well. &nbsp;It's not cheap but we still come out ahead in the long run. <br /><br /><b>Media center software sucks</b>. &nbsp;We tried using both Plex and Boxee on the mac mini, but gave up on both after too many things just didn't work; in particular, the Hulu integration on Plex was really frustrating, as it seems like it should work but then it never quite does. &nbsp;Now we just watch Hulu content through a web browser, live/recorded TV through EyeTV, and iTunes content through iTunes. &nbsp;The main drawback of this setup is that we can't get remote functionality that works seamlessly across all these different interfaces, but that's not been a problem.<br /><br />Overall I would rate this experiment as a success and would definitely recommend giving up cable.